# Early-Detection-and-Classification-of-Diabetic-Retinopathy
# A CNN-Based Approach for Early Detection and Classification of Diabetic Retinopathy
The disease is referred to as diabetic retinopathy (DR), a globally common cause of blindness that arises from the effects high glucose levels have on the retinal blood vessels. Screening for DR and categorizing them at an early stage are important for the prevention of DR from worsening. This work proposed an automated method of DR classification using deep learning on retinal fundus images. A convolutional neural network (CNN) leveraging transfer learning with MobileNetV2 was developed to classify images into seven severity levels: They include No DR, Mild Non-Proliferative Diabetes Retinopathy, Moderate Non-Proliferative Diabetes Retinopathy, Severe Non-Proliferative Diabetes Retinopathy, Very severe Non-Proliferative DR, Proliferative Diabetes Retinopathy, and Advanced Proliferative Diabetes Retinopathy. This model was trained on set of 757 fundus images with the class imbalance was balanced through data augmentation techniques we used. The proposed method also reaches a validation accuracy of 95.95% proving high effectiveness and suitability for the clinical implementation for early diagnosis and multilayer grading of DR. Thus, future work is designed to integrate this framework into real-time use, as well as using it in future evaluations with a broader, heterogeneous range of datasets.
Diabetic retinopathy refers to eye disease that results from high blood sugar levels affecting the backs of the eyes. More than 93 million people with this condition are living around the world. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), It is estimated to affect up to 80% of people with diabetes, particularly those with type 1 and type 2 diabetes for 20 years or more (Ref: WHO, 2018). Diabetic retinopathy can cause retinal hemorrhage where diabetic damaged blood vessels lead to retinal detachment and permanent blindness. 
Diabetic retinopathy has a slow course, and patients do not notice its progression, especially at the beginning, which means that diagnosis and treatment are not performed on time, which can lead to severe conditions, such as retinal detachment and the complete loss of vision. Specific barriers exacerbate these challenges, such as the limited adoption of artificial intelligence (AI)-based diagnostic tools that could enhance early detection and streamline screening processes (Ref: Nguyen et al., 2020). Furthermore, financial limitations in developing countries limit patient’s ability to undergo routine screening, receive specialized care or obtain state of the art facilities and treatment. (Ref: Alyoubi et al., 2020).
